# Describe cloud concepts (25–30%)
## Describe cloud computing

### Define cloud computing

Cloud computing: Delivery of computing services over the internet. 

### Describe the shared responsibility model

Consumer
- Information and data stored
- Devices that are allowed to connect
- Accounts and identities of the people, services, and devices

Provider
- Datacenter
- Network
- Hosts

Depends on the model
- Operating systems (*SaaS, PaaS = Provider* | *IaaS = Customer*)
- Network controls (*SaaS = Provider* | *PaaS = Shared* | *IaaS = Customer*)
- Applications (*SaaS = Provider* | *PaaS = Shared* | *IaaS = Customer*)
- Identity and infrastructure (*SaaS, PaaS = Shared* | *IaaS = Customer*)

**SaaS: Software as a Service**

**PaaS: Platform as a Service**

**IaaS: Infrastructure as a Service**

### Define cloud models, including public, private, and hybrid

Private cloud: A dedicated computing environment for a single company. More flexibility but also costs more.

Public cloud: A computing environment where anyone can purchase.

Hybrid cloud: Both private and public.

Multi-cloud: Uses two or more *public* clouds.

#### AZURE TOOLS/SERVICES
1. **Azure Arc**: Set of technologies that helps you to manage your cloud environment.
2. **Azure VMware Solution**: Lets you run your VMware Workloads in Azure.

### Identify appropriate use cases for each cloud model

### Describe the consumption-based model

CapEx: Capital Expenditure. Typically a one-time up-front expense.
OpEx: Operational Expenditure. Spending money overtime based on used resources.

### Compare cloud pricing models

Pay-as-you-go. You pay only on the services that you use. When you're done using cloud resources, you give them back and will not pay until the next usage.

### Describe serverless

## Describe the benefits of using cloud services
### Describe the benefits of high availability and scalability in the cloud

Availability: Uptime
Scalability: Handling demand

High Availablity: Maximum availability regardless of disruption or events that may occur.

SLA: Service Level Agreement. The agreement between the provider and the customer on how available is the service. If the availability is not met, the provider will provide credits to the customer.

Scalability: Ability to adjust resources to meet demand. If demand is low, resource usage is low. If demand is high, resource usage is high.
- Vertical Scaling: Making the resources more powerful (e.g. more CPUs or RAMs)
- Horizontal Scaling: Adding more resources (e.g. more virtual machines and containers)

### Describe the benefits of reliability and predictability in the cloud

Reliability: Ability of a system to recover from failures and continue to function.

Predictability: predicts the resources needed and the cost
- Performace: Predicting the resources needed
- Cost: Focused on predicting or forecasting the cost of the resources used or needed

### Describe the benefits of security and governance in the cloud

Security: Can pick a cloud solution according to desired control. Well suited to distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks.

Governance: Has templates to ensure that deployed resources meet corporate standards and government regulatory requirements. Can flag any resources that are out of compliance and provides mitigation strategies. 

### Describe the benefits of manageability in the cloud

Management **of** the cloud: **what** is managing cloud resources
- automatically scale resource deployment
- deploy resources based on preconfigured templates
- monitor health of resources and automatically replace failing ones
- receive automatic alerts based on configured metric

Management **in** the cloud: **how** to manage cloud environment
- web portal
- command line interface (CLI)
- APIs
- PowerShell

## Describe cloud service types
### Describe infrastructure as a service (IaaS)

Infrastructure as a service (IaaS)
- most flexbile because you have the maximum control of your cloud resources
- basically renting hardware

Possible scenarios:
- Lift-and-shift migration: Setting up cloud resources similar to on-premise datacenter. Running from on-premise to IaaS.
- Testing and development: Already have configurations for development and test environments for replicating rapidly. 

### Describe platform as a service (PaaS)

Platform as a Service (PaaS)
- maintains the licensing or patching of operating systems (OSs) and databases
- responsibilities are shared on **network controls**, **applications**, and **identity and directory infrastructure**

Possible scenarios:
- Development framework: Provides a framework for developing or customizing cloud-based application. E.g. Excel Macros
- Analytics or business intelligence: Can mine data for doing analysis or other processes

### Describe software as a service (SaaS)

Software as a Service (SaaS)
- basically renting fully developed application

Possible scenarios:
- Email (MS Outlook)
- Messaging (MS Teams)

### Identify appropriate use cases for each cloud service type (IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS)

# Describe Azure architecture and services (35–40%)
## Describe the core architectural components of Azure
### Describe Azure regions, region pairs, and sovereign regions
Physical infrastructure (datacenter): has resources arranged in racks, power, cooling, and networking

Availability Zone: physically separated datacenters. has at least three separate availability zones connected

Azure Region: contains at least 1 but potentially multiple datacenters

Region pairs: pairs of Azure Regions at least 300 miles away

### Describe availability zones

### Describe Azure datacenters

### Describe Azure resources and resource groups
Resource: basic building block of Azure. Anything created, deployed, etc. Examples are VMs and databases

Resource Group: group of resources. Cannot be nested. A resource is only allowed in ONE group

Azure Subscription: provides access to an account to a resource group

Azure management groups: contains all the Azure subscriptions

### Describe subscriptions

### Describe management groups

### Describe the hierarchy of resource groups, subscriptions, and management groups

## Describe Azure compute and networking services
### Describe Azure Virtual Machine
**Virtual Machines (VMs)**
- IaaS
- can have total control over the OS, run custom software, and use custom host configurations

**Virtual machine scale sets**
- can update a large set of VMs where the VMs are configured the same way and have the same purpose.

**Virtual machine availability sets**
- ensures that VMs have varied power and network connectivity. this prevents to lose VMs in a single power failure

Objectives that availablity accomplishes
1. Update domain: can update a set while the others are running completely fine
2. Fault domain: groups VMs by common power source and network switch to protect against power or networking failure

### Describe Azure virtual desktop
**Azure virtual desktop**
- another type of VM
- desktop and application virtualization device that runs on the cloud

**Enhance security**
- has centralized security for user's desktops with Microsoft Entra ID
- enables multifactor authentication and granular role-based access controls (RBACs) to users
- since the desktop is on the cloud, data and apps are separated from the local hardware

### Describe Azure containers

**Difference between VMs**
- VMs replicate hardware while Containers replicate OS

#### AZURE TOOLS/SERVICES
1. **Azure Container Instances**: fastest and simplest way to run a container in Azure
2. **Azure Container Apps**: similar to Instances but can incorporate load balancing and scaling
3. **Azure Kubernetes Service**: container orchestration service

### Describe Azure functions
#### AZURE TOOLS/SERVICES
1. **Azure Function**
just run the code, no need to setup infrastructure or platform

- stateless (default): behaves as if they restart every time to respond on an event
- stateful (Durable Functions): a context is passed to track prior activity

### Describe application hosting options

#### AZURE TOOLS/SERVICES
1. **Azure App Service**
enables to build and host web apps, background jobs, mobile back-ends, and RESTful APIs. supports Windows and Linux

Can host common app service:
- Web apps
- API apps
- WebJobs
- Mobile apps

## Describe Azure storage services


## Describe Azure identity, access, and security


# Describe Azure management and governance (30–35%)
## Describe cost management in Azure
### Describe factors that can affect costs in Azure

### Compare the pricing calculator and the Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) Calculator

### Describe cost management capabilities in Azure

### Describe the purpose of tags

## Describe features and tools in Azure for governance and compliance
### Describe the purpose of Microsoft Purview in Azure

### Describe the purpose of Azure Policy

### Describe the purpose of resource locks

## Describe features and tools for managing and deploying Azure resources
### Describe the Azure portal

### Describe Azure Cloud Shell, including Azure Command-Line Interface (CLI) and Azure PowerShell

### Describe the purpose of Azure Arc

### Describe infrastructure as code (IaC)

### Describe Azure Resource Manager (ARM) and ARM templates

## Describe monitoring tools in Azure
### Describe the purpose of Azure Advisor

### Describe Azure Service Health

### Describe Azure Monitor, including Log Analytics, Azure Monitor alerts, and Application Insights
